Beck-Chevalley conditions (#466)
the1lab/1lab: src/Cat/Displayed/BeckChevalley.lagda.md

---
description: |
  Beck-Chevalley conditions.
---
<!--
```agda
open import Cat.Displayed.Cartesian.Indexing
open import Cat.Displayed.Cocartesian.Weak
open import Cat.Displayed.Cocartesian
open import Cat.Functor.Adjoint.Mate
open import Cat.Displayed.Cartesian
open import Cat.Functor.Naturality
open import Cat.Displayed.Fibre
open import Cat.Functor.Adjoint
open import Cat.Displayed.Base
open import Cat.Prelude

import Cat.Displayed.Fibre.Reasoning
import Cat.Displayed.Reasoning
import Cat.Displayed.Morphism
import Cat.Functor.Reasoning
import Cat.Reasoning
```
-->
```agda
module Cat.Displayed.BeckChevalley where
```

# Beck-Chevalley conditions

> Let $\cE \to \cB$ be a [[cartesian fibration]], which we shall view

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let $\cE \liesover \cB$ be a [[cartesian fibration]], which we shall view
```

as a setting for some sort of logic or type theory. In particular, we
shall view the corresponding [[base change]] functors $f^{*} : \cE_{Y} \to \cE_{X}$
as an operation of substitution on predicates/types. This leads to a particularly
tidy definition of quantifiers as [[adjoints]] to base change.

> For instance, we can describe existential quantifiers as left adjoints

Reviewer: maybe mention that we're assuming $\cB$ has finite products (limits?) in this paragraph?

> $\exists_{Y} : \cE_{X \times Y} \to \cE{X}$ to base changes along projections

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$\exists_{Y} : \cE_{X \times Y} \to \cE_{X}$ to the base changes along projections
```

$\pi : X \times Y \to X$:

> - The introduction rule is given by the unit $\eta : \cE_{X}(P, \exists_{Y} (\pi^{*} P))$
> - The elimination rule is given by the counit $\eps : \cE_{X \times Y}(\pi^{*}\exists_{Y} P, P)$
> - The $\beta$ and $\eta$ rules are given by the zig-zag equations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The introduction rule is given by the unit $\eta : \cE_{X}(P, \exists_{Y} (\pi^{*} P))$;
- The elimination rule is given by the counit $\eps : \cE_{X \times Y}(\pi^{*}\exists_{Y} P, P)$; and
- The $\beta$ and $\eta$ rules are given by the zig-zag equations.
```

This story is quite elegant, but there is a missing piece: how do substitutions
interact with $\exists$, or, in categorical terms, how do base change functors
commute with their left adjoints? In particular, consider the following
diagram:

~~~{.quiver}
\begin{tikzcd}
  {\mathcal{E}_{\Gamma \times X}} && {\mathcal{E}_{\Gamma}} \\
  \\
  {\mathcal{E}_{\Delta \times X}} && {\mathcal{E}_{\Delta}}
  \arrow["{\exists_{X}}", from=1-1, to=1-3]
  \arrow["{(\sigma \times \id)^{*}}"', from=1-1, to=3-1]
  \arrow["{\sigma^{*}}", from=1-3, to=3-3]
  \arrow["{\exists_{X}}"', from=3-1, to=3-3]
\end{tikzcd}
~~~

> Ideally, we'd like $(\sigma)^*{\exists_{X} P} \iso \exists_{X}((\sigma \times \id)^{*} P)$;
> this corresponds to the usual substitution rule for quantifiers. Somewhat

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ideally, we'd like $(\sigma)^*{\exists_{X} P} \iso \exists_{X}((\sigma \times \id)^{*} P)$,
which corresponds to the usual substitution rule for quantifiers. Somewhat
```

Reviewer: not sure how to feel about the parenthesization here, maybe

$\sigma^\*(\exists_{X} P) \cong \exists_{X}((\sigma \times \mathrm{id})^\* P)$

instead?

surprisingly, this does not always hold; we always have a map

$$\exists_{X}((\sigma \times \id)^{*} P) \to (\sigma)^*{\exists_{X} P}$$

> that comes from some adjoint yoga, but this map is not necessarily invertible!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
coming from adjoint yoga, but this map is not necessarily invertible!
```
also remove the empty lines around this maths block so it renders without a new paragraph

> This leads us to the main topic of this page: the **Beck-Chevalley**
> conditions are a set of properties that ensure that the aforementioned

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This leads us to the main topic of this page: the **Beck-Chevalley
conditions** are a set of properties that ensure that the aforementioned
```

map is invertible, which in turn ensures that our quantifiers are stable
under substitution.

## Left Beck-Chevalley conditions

A **left Beck-Chevalley condition** characterises well-behaved left adjoints
to base change. Typically, this is done by appealing to properties of
base change, but we opt to use a a more local definition in
terms of [[cartesian|cartesian map]] and [[cocartesian|cocartesian map]]
maps. This has the benefit of working in displayed categories that may
be missing some cartesian maps.

:::{.definition #left-beck-chevalley-condition}
Explicitly, a square $fg = hk$ in $\cB$ satisfies the left Beck-Chevalley

> condition if for every square $f'g' = h'interp$ over $fg = hk$, if $g'$ and

Reviewer: are we really calling the map $interp$?

Author: I thought I caught all the search and replaces!

$h'$ are cartesian and $f'$ is cocartesian, then $interp$ is cocartesian.

> This is best understood diagrammatically: suppose we are in a situation
> like the diagram below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is best understood diagrammatically, so consider the diagram below:
```

      h^*k^!-comparison b' = h.universalv (f.^! b') (k^!-interp b')

      k^!h^*-comparison : ∀ b' → Hom[ id ] (k.^! (g.^* b')) (h.^* (f.^! b'))
      k^!h^*-comparison b' = k.universalv (g.^* b') (h^*-interp b')

      comparison-square : ∀ {b'} → h^*k^!-comparison b' ≡ k^!h^*-comparison b'
      comparison-square {b'} =
        h.uniquep₂ (f.^! b') _ _ (idr _) _ _
          (h.commutesv _ _)
          (k.uniquep (g.^* b') _ (idr _) _ _
            (pullr[] _ (k.commutesv (g.^* b') _)
             ∙[] h.commutesp _ (sym p) (f.ι b' ∘' g.π b')))
```

The immortal pentagon diagram above *almost* lets us "interpolate" $B'$
around the entire square in the base, but there is a conspicuous gap between $h^*f_!(B')$
and $k_!g^*(B')$; this is precisely the missing map that the Beck-Chevalley condition
ought to give us.

```agda
    left-beck-chevalley→comparison-invertible
      : left-beck-chevalley E f g h k p
      → ∀ {b'} → is-invertible↓ (h^*k^!-comparison b')
```

First, observe that the map $(\iota \circ \pi)^{*}$ fits into a square
with 2 cartesian sides and 1 cocartesian side; so can apply Beck-Chevalley

> to deduce that $(\iota \circ \pi)^{*}$ is cocartesian.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to deduce that it is cocartesian.
```

  \arrow["{(\iota \circ \pi)^*}"{description}, color={rgb,255:red,92;green,92;blue,214}, from=2-1, to=1-4]
  \arrow["\pi"{description}, color={rgb,255:red,214;green,92;blue,92}, from=2-1, to=3-3]
  \arrow[lies over, from=2-1, to=4-1]
  \arrow[lies over, from=2-6, to=4-6]
  \arrow["\iota"{description}, color={rgb,255:red,214;green,92;blue,92}, from=3-3, to=2-6]
  \arrow[lies over, from=3-3, to=5-3]
  \arrow["h"{description}, from=3-4, to=4-6]
  \arrow["k"{description}, from=4-1, to=3-4]
  \arrow["g"{description}, from=4-1, to=5-3]
  \arrow["f"{description}, from=5-3, to=4-6]
\end{tikzcd}
~~~

```agda
    left-beck-chevalley→comparison-invertible left-bc {b'} =
      make-invertible↓ comparison⁻¹ left-beck-invl left-beck-invr
      where
        h^*-interp-cocartesian : is-cocartesian E k (h^*-interp b')
        h^*-interp-cocartesian =
          left-bc
            (symP (h.commutesp (f.^! b') (sym p) (f.ι b' ∘' g.π b')))
            (f.cocartesian b')
            (g.cartesian b')
            (h.cartesian (f.^! b'))

        module h^*-interp = is-cocartesian h^*-interp-cocartesian
```

Notably, this lets us factor the map $\iota : \cE_{k}(g^{*}(B'),k_{!}g^{*}(B'))$

> to get a vertical map $\cE()^{*}f_{!}(B'), k_{!}g^{*}(B'))$ that fits neatly

Reviewer: ![](https://ame.fyi/wRol.png)

is this right?

into the gap in the pentagon.

```agda
        comparison⁻¹ : Hom[ id ] (h.^* (f.^! b')) (k.^! (g.^* b'))
        comparison⁻¹ = h^*-interp.universalv (k.ι (g.^* b'))
```

We can show that our putative inverse is a left inverse of the comparison
map by appealing to uniqueness of both maps into and maps out of $h^*f_!(B')$,

> as $h^*f_!(B')$ is simultaneously a cartesian and a cocartesian lift. This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as it is simultaneously a cartesian and a cocartesian lift. This
```

in $\cB$ such that we have cocartesian lifts over $f, k$, and cartesian
lifts over $g, h$, as in the following diagram.

~~~{.quiver}
\begin{tikzcd}
  && C \\
  A &&&& D \\
  && B
  \arrow["h"{description}, from=1-3, to=2-5]
  \arrow["k"{description}, from=2-1, to=1-3]
  \arrow["g"{description}, from=2-1, to=3-3]
  \arrow["f"{description}, from=3-3, to=2-5]
\end{tikzcd}
~~~

```agda
  module _
    {a b c d}
    {f : Hom b d} {g : Hom a b} {h : Hom c d} {k : Hom a c}
    (p : f ∘ g ≡ h ∘ k)
    (f^! : ∀ b' → Cocartesian-lift E f b')
    (g^* : ∀ b' → Cartesian-lift E g b')
    (h^* : ∀ c' → Cartesian-lift E h c')
    (k^! : ∀ c' → Cocartesian-lift E k c')
    where
```

<!--
```agda
    private
      module f (b' : Ob[ b ]) where
        open Cocartesian-lift (f^! b') renaming (y' to ^!_; lifting to ι) public

      module g (b' : Ob[ b ]) where
        open Cartesian-lift (g^* b') renaming (x' to ^*; lifting to π) public

      module h (d' : Ob[ d ]) where
        open Cartesian-lift (h^* d') renaming (x' to ^*; lifting to π) public

      module k (a' : Ob[ a ]) where
        open Cocartesian-lift (k^! a') renaming (y' to ^!_; lifting to ι) public
```
-->

> Now, fix some $B' : \cE_{B}$. We can form the following immortal
> pentagonal diagram by repeatedly performing taking lifts of $B'$ and
> applying various universal properties.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, fix some $B' : \cE_{B}$. We can form the following immortal
pentagonal diagram by repeatedly taking lifts of $B'$ and
applying various universal properties.
```

Cool name, cool diagram

      k^!-interp b' = k.universal' (g.^* b') (sym p) (f.ι b' ∘' g.π b')

      h^*k^!-comparison : ∀ b' → Hom[ id ] (k.^! (g.^* b')) (h.^* (f.^! b'))
      h^*k^!-comparison b' = h.universalv (f.^! b') (k^!-interp b')

      k^!h^*-comparison : ∀ b' → Hom[ id ] (k.^! (g.^* b')) (h.^* (f.^! b'))
      k^!h^*-comparison b' = k.universalv (g.^* b') (h^*-interp b')

      comparison-square : ∀ {b'} → h^*k^!-comparison b' ≡ k^!h^*-comparison b'
      comparison-square {b'} =
        h.uniquep₂ (f.^! b') _ _ (idr _) _ _
          (h.commutesv _ _)
          (k.uniquep (g.^* b') _ (idr _) _ _
            (pullr[] _ (k.commutesv (g.^* b') _)
             ∙[] h.commutesp _ (sym p) (f.ι b' ∘' g.π b')))
```

The immortal pentagon diagram above *almost* lets us "interpolate" $B'$
around the entire square in the base, but there is a conspicuous gap
between $h^*f_!(B')$ and $k_!g^*(B')$; this is precisely the missing map
that the Beck-Chevalley condition ought to give us.

```agda
    left-beck-chevalley→comparison-invertible
      : left-beck-chevalley E f g h k p
      → ∀ {b'} → is-invertible↓ (h^*k^!-comparison b')
```

First, observe that the map $(\iota \circ \pi)^{*}$ fits into a square

> with 2 cartesian sides and 1 cocartesian side; so can apply

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with 2 cartesian sides and 1 cocartesian side; so we can apply
```

Beck-Chevalley to deduce that it is cocartesian.

~~~{.quiver}
\begin{tikzcd}
  &&& {h^*k_!(B')} \\
  {g^*(B')} &&&&& {f_!(B')} \\
  && {B'} & C \\
  A &&&&& D \\
  && B
  \arrow["\pi"{description}, color={rgb,255:red,214;green,92;blue,92}, from=1-4, to=2-6]
  \arrow[from=1-4, to=3-4]
  \arrow["{(\iota \circ \pi)^*}"{description}, color={rgb,255:red,92;green,92;blue,214}, from=2-1, to=1-4]
  \arrow["\pi"{description}, color={rgb,255:red,214;green,92;blue,92}, from=2-1, to=3-3]
  \arrow[lies over, from=2-1, to=4-1]
  \arrow[lies over, from=2-6, to=4-6]
  \arrow["\iota"{description}, color={rgb,255:red,214;green,92;blue,92}, from=3-3, to=2-6]
  \arrow[lies over, from=3-3, to=5-3]
  \arrow["h"{description}, from=3-4, to=4-6]
  \arrow["k"{description}, from=4-1, to=3-4]
  \arrow["g"{description}, from=4-1, to=5-3]
  \arrow["f"{description}, from=5-3, to=4-6]
\end{tikzcd}

> ~~~

Reviewer 2: The two comparison arrows are backwards.
